templates/commands/chain.md, before:

---
description: Generate adaptive task chains using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware task execution.
handoffs:
  - label: Execute Adaptive Implementation
    agent: arckit.implement
    prompt: Execute implementation based on the adaptive task chains...
  - label: Update Adaptive Plan
    agent: arckit.plan
    prompt: Update implementation plan based on chain execution
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/generate-tasks.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/generate-tasks.ps1 -Json
agent_scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh __AGENT__
  ps: scripts/powershell/update-agent-context.ps1 -AgentType __AGENT__
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for PLAN_FILE, TASKS_FILE, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read PLAN_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, SPEC_FILE, and `/memory/constitution.md`. Load TASKS_FILE template (already copied).

3. **Execute adaptive task chain workflow**: Follow the structure in TASKS_FILE template to:
   - Build Reasoning Chain Structure (connections between decisions and actions)
   - Generate Adaptive Task Dependencies (dynamic dependencies that evolve)
   - Create Context Propagation (how context flows through the chain)
   - Establish Feedback Integration (results feeding back into chain)
   - Design Evolution Tracking (how chains adapt based on outcomes)
   - Implement Quality Assurance for Chains (validation during execution)

4. **Adaptive Chain Validation**: Validate task chains against:
   - Context switching requirements
   - Adaptation readiness criteria
   - Evolution pathway feasibility

5. **Generate Chain Execution Artifacts**: Create execution documents with:
   - Dynamic chain configurations
   - Context-aware execution parameters
   - Learning mechanisms for chain improvement

## Reasoning Chain Structure

### Adaptive Decision Chains

1. **Chain of Adaptive Thought**:
   - Connections between requirements and implementation
   - Decision points with justification and context
   - Alternative paths and their reasoning for different contexts

2. **Dynamic Decision Points**:
   - Decision points that adapt to changing requirements
   - Context-sensitive decision criteria
   - Learning from previous decision outcomes

3. **Adaptive Path Selection**:
   - How to choose between different chain paths
   - Context-based path selection criteria
   - Evolution of path selection based on outcomes

## Adaptive Task Generation

### Dynamic Task Management

1. **Evolution-Aware Tasks**:
   - Tasks that evolve based on intermediate results
   - Dynamic task creation during execution
   - Conditional task dependencies that adapt to context

2. **Context-Sensitive Task Execution**:
   - How tasks execute differently in different contexts
   - Context-aware task parameters
   - Task execution strategies for different environments

3. **Feedback-Driven Task Evolution**:
   - How task results influence future tasks
   - Task modification based on early results
   - Adaptive task scheduling based on context

## Context Propagation

### Cross-Chain Context Management

1. **Context Flow Through Chains**:
   - How context information propagates through the chain
   - Information that must be maintained across steps
   - Context updates during chain execution

2. **Context Switching in Chains**:
   - How chains handle context changes during execution
   - Context boundaries within the chain
   - Context transition mechanisms between tasks

3. **Context Awareness at Task Level**:
   - How individual tasks recognize and respond to context
   - Context-sensitive task parameters
   - Task behavior adaptation to context

## Feedback Integration

### Adaptive Chain Learning

1. **Result Integration**:
   - How results feed back into the chain
   - Correction mechanisms for failed chain steps
   - Learning from chain execution outcomes

2. **Adaptive Correction**:
   - How to correct the chain when steps fail
   - Alternative chain paths when primary paths fail
   - Recovery mechanisms for chain disruptions

3. **Continuous Improvement**:
   - How to improve chain execution over time
   - Learning from successful and failed executions
   - Evolution of chain strategies based on experience

## Evolution Tracking

### Chain Adaptation History

1. **Adaptation Tracking**:
   - How the reasoning chain adapts based on feedback
   - Links between chain decisions and their outcomes
   - Historical context for future chain execution

2. **Outcome Attribution**:
   - How to track which chain decisions led to outcomes
   - Attribution of success and failure to specific chain elements
   - Learning from outcome chains

3. **Adaptive Memory**:
   - How chain execution history informs future chains
   - Institutional memory of effective chain strategies
   - Knowledge transfer between similar chains

## Quality Assurance for Chains

### Adaptive Chain Validation

1. **Validation During Execution**:
   - Validation points within the reasoning chain
   - Consistency checks during execution
   - Quality gates that adapt to changing requirements

2. **Context-Aware Validation**:
   - Different validation criteria for different contexts
   - Validation during context transitions in chains
   - Consistency across different execution contexts

3. **Termination Conditions**:
   - How adaptive chains know when to terminate
   - Adaptive termination based on evolving requirements
   - Context-sensitive completion criteria

## Key rules

- Ensure all task chains are adaptive and context-aware
- Include feedback mechanisms for chain learning
- Design chains that can evolve during execution
- ERROR on chains that don't incorporate adaptation

Commit message:

Update project structure and documentation for adaptive development. Modify .gitignore to include new directories and files. Remove outdated spec-driven documentation. Refactor bash and PowerShell scripts to align with new directory structure. Enhance command templates with adaptive principles and testing requirements. Add critical validation points across various commands to ensure quality and adaptability.

templates/commands/chain.md, after:

---
description: Generate adaptive task chains using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware task execution.
handoffs:
  - label: Execute Adaptive Implementation
    agent: arckit.implement
    prompt: Execute implementation based on the adaptive task chains...
  - label: Update Adaptive Plan
    agent: arckit.plan
    prompt: Update implementation plan based on chain execution
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/generate-tasks.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/generate-tasks.ps1 -Json
agent_scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh __AGENT__
  ps: scripts/powershell/update-agent-context.ps1 -AgentType __AGENT__
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for PLAN_FILE, TASKS_FILE, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read PLAN_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, SPEC_FILE, and `.arckit/memory/constitution.md`. Load TASKS_FILE template (already copied).

3. **Execute adaptive task chain workflow**: Follow the structure in TASKS_FILE template to:
   - Build Reasoning Chain Structure (connections between decisions and actions)
   - Generate Adaptive Task Dependencies (dynamic dependencies that evolve)
   - Create Context Propagation (how context flows through the chain)
   - Establish Feedback Integration (results feeding back into chain)
   - Design Evolution Tracking (how chains adapt based on outcomes)
   - **CRITICAL**: Include comprehensive testing tasks (unit, integration, system tests)
   - **CRITICAL**: Add functionality verification tasks for all features
   - **CRITICAL**: Include dependency validation and integration testing tasks
   - **CRITICAL**: Add error handling and edge case testing tasks
   - Implement Quality Assurance for Chains (validation during execution)

4. **Adaptive Chain Validation**: Validate task chains against:
   - Context switching requirements
   - Adaptation readiness criteria
   - Evolution pathway feasibility

5. **Generate Chain Execution Artifacts**: Create execution documents with:
   - Dynamic chain configurations
   - Context-aware execution parameters
   - Learning mechanisms for chain improvement

## Reasoning Chain Structure

### Adaptive Decision Chains

1. **Chain of Adaptive Thought**:
   - Connections between requirements and implementation
   - Decision points with justification and context
   - Alternative paths and their reasoning for different contexts

2. **Dynamic Decision Points**:
   - Decision points that adapt to changing requirements
   - Context-sensitive decision criteria
   - Learning from previous decision outcomes

3. **Adaptive Path Selection**:
   - How to choose between different chain paths
   - Context-based path selection criteria
   - Evolution of path selection based on outcomes

## Adaptive Task Generation

### Dynamic Task Management

1. **Evolution-Aware Tasks**:
   - Tasks that evolve based on intermediate results
   - Dynamic task creation during execution
   - Conditional task dependencies that adapt to context

2. **Context-Sensitive Task Execution**:
   - How tasks execute differently in different contexts
   - Context-aware task parameters
   - Task execution strategies for different environments

3. **Feedback-Driven Task Evolution**:
   - How task results influence future tasks
   - Task modification based on early results
   - Adaptive task scheduling based on context

## Context Propagation

### Cross-Chain Context Management

1. **Context Flow Through Chains**:
   - How context information propagates through the chain
   - Information that must be maintained across steps
   - Context updates during chain execution

2. **Context Switching in Chains**:
   - How chains handle context changes during execution
   - Context boundaries within the chain
   - Context transition mechanisms between tasks

3. **Context Awareness at Task Level**:
   - How individual tasks recognize and respond to context
   - Context-sensitive task parameters
   - Task behavior adaptation to context

## Feedback Integration

### Adaptive Chain Learning

1. **Result Integration**:
   - How results feed back into the chain
   - Correction mechanisms for failed chain steps
   - Learning from chain execution outcomes

2. **Adaptive Correction**:
   - How to correct the chain when steps fail
   - Alternative chain paths when primary paths fail
   - Recovery mechanisms for chain disruptions

3. **Continuous Improvement**:
   - How to improve chain execution over time
   - Learning from successful and failed executions
   - Evolution of chain strategies based on experience

## Evolution Tracking

### Chain Adaptation History

1. **Adaptation Tracking**:
   - How the reasoning chain adapts based on feedback
   - Links between chain decisions and their outcomes
   - Historical context for future chain execution

2. **Outcome Attribution**:
   - How to track which chain decisions led to outcomes
   - Attribution of success and failure to specific chain elements
   - Learning from outcome chains

3. **Adaptive Memory**:
   - How chain execution history informs future chains
   - Institutional memory of effective chain strategies
   - Knowledge transfer between similar chains

## Quality Assurance for Chains

### Adaptive Chain Validation

1. **Validation During Execution**:
   - Validation points within the reasoning chain
   - Consistency checks during execution
   - Quality gates that adapt to changing requirements

2. **Context-Aware Validation**:
   - Different validation criteria for different contexts
   - Validation during context transitions in chains
   - Consistency across different execution contexts

3. **Termination Conditions**:
   - How adaptive chains know when to terminate
   - Adaptive termination based on evolving requirements
   - Context-sensitive completion criteria

## Key rules

- Ensure all task chains are adaptive and context-aware
- Include feedback mechanisms for chain learning
- Design chains that can evolve during execution
- ERROR on chains that don't incorporate adaptation

## Next Step Recommendation

Now that your adaptive task chains are complete, the most logical next step is:

- **Primary**: Run `/arckit.implement` to execute the implementation based on your task chains
- **Alternative**: Run `/arckit.checklist` to create a quality assurance checklist before implementation

The `/arckit.implement` command will execute your adaptive task chains with context-aware deployment strategies.

**Pro tip**: Your reasoning chains will guide the implementation process, ensuring each step aligns with the adaptive goals you've established.
