templates/commands/checklist.md, before:

---
description: Generate adaptive checklists using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware quality assurance.
handoffs:
  - label: Execute Quality Verification
    agent: arckit.implement
    prompt: Verify implementation against adaptive checklist...
  - label: Update Quality Framework
    agent: arckit.analyze
    prompt: Analyze quality assurance effectiveness
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/create-new-feature.sh --json "{ARGS}"
  ps: scripts/powershell/create-new-feature.ps1 -Json "{ARGS}"
---
# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for CHECKLIST_FILE, QUALITY_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read upstream artifacts (SPEC_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, PLAN_FILE, IMPLEMENTATION_ARTIFACTS), and `/memory/constitution.md`. Load CHECKLIST_FILE template.

3. **Execute adaptive checklist workflow**:
   - Generate Context-Aware Quality Criteria
   - Create Evolution-Ready Validation Items
   - Build Adaptive Compliance Checks
   - Design Feedback-Driven Quality Assessment
   - Implement Learning-Based Quality Improvement
   - Establish Dynamic Quality Thresholds

4. **Adaptive Checklist Validation**: Validate checklist against:
   - Context sensitivity requirements
   - Adaptation validation needs
   - Quality assurance evolution pathways

5. **Generate Adaptive Quality Artifacts**: Create quality artifacts with:
   - Context-sensitive validation criteria
   - Evolution-aware quality metrics
   - Learning-enhanced quality standards

## Context-Aware Quality Criteria

### Adaptive Quality Standards

1. **Context-Sensitive Validation**:
   - Quality criteria that adapt to different contexts
   - Different validation standards for different environments
   - Context-appropriate quality thresholds

2. **Dynamic Quality Assessment**:
   - Quality measures that evolve with requirements
   - Adaptive quality gates that adjust to context
   - Context-aware quality metrics

3. **Cross-Context Consistency**:
   - Maintaining quality consistency across contexts
   - Validation of context switching quality
   - Quality standards for context transitions

## Evolution-Ready Validation

### Quality During Evolution

1. **Adaptive Validation Criteria**:
   - Validation items that can evolve with the system
   - Quality checks that adapt to changing requirements
   - Evolution pathway quality verification

2. **Change Impact Assessment**:
   - How changes affect quality in different contexts
   - Validation of evolution effectiveness
   - Quality impact of adaptive changes

3. **Quality Evolution Tracking**:
   - Tracking quality metrics during evolution
   - Historical quality assessment for improvements
   - Quality trend analysis across adaptations

## Adaptive Compliance Checks

### Context-Sensitive Compliance

1. **Dynamic Compliance Requirements**:
   - Compliance standards that adapt to context
   - Different compliance levels for different contexts
   - Adaptive regulatory compliance checking

2. **Evolution Compliance**:
   - Ensuring compliance during evolution
   - Compliance validation for adaptation mechanisms
   - Regulatory impact of adaptive systems

3. **Multi-Context Compliance**:
   - Compliance across different operational contexts
   - Context transition compliance validation
   - Cross-context compliance consistency

## Feedback-Driven Quality Assessment

### Learning-Based Quality

1. **Quality Feedback Integration**:
   - How to integrate quality feedback into systems
   - Quality metrics based on user feedback
   - Adaptive quality improvement from experience

2. **Performance Learning**:
   - Learning from quality successes and failures
   - Quality validation based on performance
   - Adaptive quality adjustment from outcomes

3. **Continuous Quality Improvement**:
   - How quality standards improve over time
   - Quality learning from similar projects
   - Institutional quality knowledge building

## Learning-Based Quality Improvement

### Adaptive Quality Enhancement

1. **Quality Learning Systems**:
   - How quality assessments learn from results
   - Quality metrics that improve with experience
   - Adaptive quality standards from best practices

2. **Quality Evolution Mechanisms**:
   - How quality standards evolve with requirements
   - Quality improvement based on adaptation outcomes
   - Learning from quality validation results

3. **Institutional Quality Knowledge**:
   - Building institutional quality knowledge
   - Quality standards based on organizational learning
   - Quality improvement across projects

## Dynamic Quality Thresholds

### Threshold-Based Quality Adaptation

1. **Context-Adaptive Thresholds**:
   - Quality thresholds that adjust to context
   - Different standards for different operational contexts
   - Dynamic quality requirements based on environment

2. **Evolution-Aware Thresholds**:
   - Quality thresholds that adapt during evolution
   - Threshold adjustments based on adaptation effectiveness
   - Quality standards for evolutionary phases

3. **Performance-Based Thresholds**:
   - Quality thresholds based on system performance
   - Adaptive standards from performance learning
   - Threshold evolution based on results

## Key rules

- Checklists must be adaptive and context-aware
- Include evolution validation for all quality measures
- Build in learning and improvement mechanisms
- ERROR on checklists that don't accommodate adaptation

Commit message:

Update project structure and documentation for adaptive development. Modify .gitignore to include new directories and files. Remove outdated spec-driven documentation. Refactor bash and PowerShell scripts to align with new directory structure. Enhance command templates with adaptive principles and testing requirements. Add critical validation points across various commands to ensure quality and adaptability.

templates/commands/checklist.md, after:

---
description: Generate adaptive checklists using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware quality assurance.
handoffs:
  - label: Execute Quality Verification
    agent: arckit.implement
    prompt: Verify implementation against adaptive checklist...
  - label: Update Quality Framework
    agent: arckit.analyze
    prompt: Analyze quality assurance effectiveness
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/create-new-feature.sh --json "{ARGS}"
  ps: scripts/powershell/create-new-feature.ps1 -Json "{ARGS}"
---
# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for CHECKLIST_FILE, QUALITY_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read upstream artifacts (SPEC_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, PLAN_FILE, IMPLEMENTATION_ARTIFACTS), and `.arckit/memory/constitution.md`. Load CHECKLIST_FILE template.

3. **Execute adaptive checklist workflow**:
   - Generate Context-Aware Quality Criteria
   - Create Evolution-Ready Validation Items
   - Build Adaptive Compliance Checks
   - Design Feedback-Driven Quality Assessment
   - **CRITICAL**: Generate comprehensive testing checklists (unit, integration, system)
   - **CRITICAL**: Create functionality verification items for all features
   - **CRITICAL**: Include dependency and integration validation items
   - **CRITICAL**: Add error handling and edge case verification items
   - Implement Learning-Based Quality Improvement
   - Establish Dynamic Quality Thresholds

4. **Adaptive Checklist Validation**: Validate checklist against:
   - Context sensitivity requirements
   - Adaptation validation needs
   - Quality assurance evolution pathways

5. **Generate Adaptive Quality Artifacts**: Create quality artifacts with:
   - Context-sensitive validation criteria
   - Evolution-aware quality metrics
   - Learning-enhanced quality standards

## Context-Aware Quality Criteria

### Adaptive Quality Standards

1. **Context-Sensitive Validation**:
   - Quality criteria that adapt to different contexts
   - Different validation standards for different environments
   - Context-appropriate quality thresholds

2. **Dynamic Quality Assessment**:
   - Quality measures that evolve with requirements
   - Adaptive quality gates that adjust to context
   - Context-aware quality metrics

3. **Cross-Context Consistency**:
   - Maintaining quality consistency across contexts
   - Validation of context switching quality
   - Quality standards for context transitions

## Evolution-Ready Validation

### Quality During Evolution

1. **Adaptive Validation Criteria**:
   - Validation items that can evolve with the system
   - Quality checks that adapt to changing requirements
   - Evolution pathway quality verification

2. **Change Impact Assessment**:
   - How changes affect quality in different contexts
   - Validation of evolution effectiveness
   - Quality impact of adaptive changes

3. **Quality Evolution Tracking**:
   - Tracking quality metrics during evolution
   - Historical quality assessment for improvements
   - Quality trend analysis across adaptations

## Adaptive Compliance Checks

### Context-Sensitive Compliance

1. **Dynamic Compliance Requirements**:
   - Compliance standards that adapt to context
   - Different compliance levels for different contexts
   - Adaptive regulatory compliance checking

2. **Evolution Compliance**:
   - Ensuring compliance during evolution
   - Compliance validation for adaptation mechanisms
   - Regulatory impact of adaptive systems

3. **Multi-Context Compliance**:
   - Compliance across different operational contexts
   - Context transition compliance validation
   - Cross-context compliance consistency

## Feedback-Driven Quality Assessment

### Learning-Based Quality

1. **Quality Feedback Integration**:
   - How to integrate quality feedback into systems
   - Quality metrics based on user feedback
   - Adaptive quality improvement from experience

2. **Performance Learning**:
   - Learning from quality successes and failures
   - Quality validation based on performance
   - Adaptive quality adjustment from outcomes

3. **Continuous Quality Improvement**:
   - How quality standards improve over time
   - Quality learning from similar projects
   - Institutional quality knowledge building

## Learning-Based Quality Improvement

### Adaptive Quality Enhancement

1. **Quality Learning Systems**:
   - How quality assessments learn from results
   - Quality metrics that improve with experience
   - Adaptive quality standards from best practices

2. **Quality Evolution Mechanisms**:
   - How quality standards evolve with requirements
   - Quality improvement based on adaptation outcomes
   - Learning from quality validation results

3. **Institutional Quality Knowledge**:
   - Building institutional quality knowledge
   - Quality standards based on organizational learning
   - Quality improvement across projects

## Dynamic Quality Thresholds

### Threshold-Based Quality Adaptation

1. **Context-Adaptive Thresholds**:
   - Quality thresholds that adjust to context
   - Different standards for different operational contexts
   - Dynamic quality requirements based on environment

2. **Evolution-Aware Thresholds**:
   - Quality thresholds that adapt during evolution
   - Threshold adjustments based on adaptation effectiveness
   - Quality standards for evolutionary phases

3. **Performance-Based Thresholds**:
   - Quality thresholds based on system performance
   - Adaptive standards from performance learning
   - Threshold evolution based on results

## Key rules

- Checklists must be adaptive and context-aware
- Include evolution validation for all quality measures
- Build in learning and improvement mechanisms
- ERROR on checklists that don't accommodate adaptation
- **CRITICAL**: Checklists must include comprehensive testing verification items
- **CRITICAL**: Checklists must validate all functionality works as specified
- **CRITICAL**: Checklists must include dependency and integration verification
- **CRITICAL**: Checklists must verify error handling and edge cases

## Next Step Recommendation

Now that your adaptive checklist is complete, the most logical next step is:

- **Primary**: Use the checklist to verify your implementation (either go back to `/arckit.implement` or execute verification tasks manually)
- **Alternative**: Return to `/arckit.define` for the next feature, using this checklist as a quality reference

The adaptive checklist you've created should guide quality assurance for your current implementation and serve as a reference for future development.

**Pro tip**: The quality criteria you've defined will help ensure your adaptive systems maintain quality across different contexts and evolution paths.
