templates/commands/constitution.md, before:

---
description: Establish adaptive governance principles using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware institutional learning.
handoffs:
  - label: Apply Adaptive Principles
    agent: arckit.define
    prompt: Apply constitution principles to feature specification...
  - label: Update Governance Framework
    agent: arckit.plan
    prompt: Plan for governance improvements based on constitution
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/create-new-feature.sh --json "{ARGS}"
  ps: scripts/powershell/create-new-feature.ps1 -Json "{ARGS}"
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for CONSTITUTION_FILE, GOVERNANCE_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read existing `/memory/constitution.md` if available, otherwise start fresh. Load CONSTITUTION_FILE template.

3. **Execute adaptive constitution workflow**:
   - Define Core Adaptive Principles
   - Establish Adaptive Governance Framework  
   - Create Reasoning Chain Protocols
   - Design Evolution Framework Implementation
   - Implement Context Integration Standards
   - Build Learning & Improvement Systems

4. **Adaptive Governance Validation**: Validate constitution against:
   - Organizational adaptability requirements
   - Context sensitivity needs
   - Multi-agent collaboration capabilities

5. **Generate Adaptive Governance Artifacts**: Create governance artifacts with:
   - Adaptive decision-making frameworks
   - Context-aware policy mechanisms
   - Learning and evolution protocols

## Core Principles of Adaptive Reasoning Chains

### Adaptive Behavioral Principles

1. **Principles Guiding Adaptive Behavior**:
   - Core principles that govern adaptive behavior
   - Values that remain consistent during evolution
   - Ethical guidelines for adaptive systems

2. **Evolution Integrity Principles**:
   - Principles that maintain system integrity during change
   - Consistency requirements across evolution paths
   - Stability requirements during adaptation

3. **Context Awareness Principles**:
   - Principles for appropriate context-sensitive behavior
   - Guidelines for context detection and response
   - Ethical considerations for context usage

## Adaptive Governance Framework

### Dynamic Decision-Making

1. **Adaptive Decision Authority**:
   - How decisions are made in evolving systems
   - Authority structures that adapt to context
   - Conflict resolution in dynamic environments

2. **Context-Sensitive Governance**:
   - Governance mechanisms that adapt to different contexts
   - Policy frameworks that adjust to environment
   - Authority delegation based on context

3. **Multi-Agent Coordination**:
   - How multiple agents collaborate in adaptive systems
   - Shared knowledge protocols
   - Coordination mechanisms across agents

## Reasoning Chain Protocols

### Chain Creation Standards

1. **Adaptive Chain Creation**:
   - Standards for creating reasoning chains
   - Protocols for multi-agent collaboration
   - Guidelines for traceability and accountability

2. **Chain Evolution Protocols**:
   - How reasoning chains evolve over time
   - Standards for chain modification
   - Quality criteria for chain updates

3. **Cross-Chain Coordination**:
   - How different reasoning chains interact
   - Consistency mechanisms between chains
   - Conflict resolution in chain interactions

## Evolution Framework Implementation

### System Evolution Governance

1. **Evolution Management Framework**:
   - Framework for managing system evolution
   - Standards for adaptation triggers
   - Quality criteria for evolutionary changes

2. **Change Readiness Assessment**:
   - How to assess if systems are ready for change
   - Criteria for evolutionary path selection
   - Risk assessment for evolution decisions

3. **Evolution Quality Gates**:
   - Quality checkpoints during evolution
   - Validation criteria for evolutionary changes
   - Rollback triggers for failed evolutions

## Context Integration Standards

### Environmental Adaptation

1. **Context Detection Standards**:
   - Principles for context awareness
   - Guidelines for environmental adaptation
   - Standards for context-sensitive behavior

2. **Context Transition Protocols**:
   - How to handle context transitions safely
   - Consistency requirements across contexts
   - Validation during context switching

3. **Context Boundary Management**:
   - How to define and manage context boundaries
   - Cross-context coordination requirements
   - Context isolation when needed

## Learning & Improvement Systems

### Continuous Improvement Framework

1. **Institutional Learning Principles**:
   - Principles for continuous learning
   - Mechanisms for institutional knowledge
   - Standards for methodology improvement

2. **Adaptive Knowledge Management**:
   - How knowledge adapts to new information
   - Learning from success and failure
   - Knowledge sharing across contexts

3. **Improvement Validation**:
   - How to validate improvement effectiveness
   - Standards for improvement assessment
   - Feedback integration for continuous improvement

## Key rules

- Constitution must support adaptation at all levels
- Include context-aware governance mechanisms
- Build in learning and institutional memory systems
- ERROR on principles that impede adaptation or learning

Commit message:

Update project structure and documentation for adaptive development. Modify .gitignore to include new directories and files. Remove outdated spec-driven documentation. Refactor bash and PowerShell scripts to align with new directory structure. Enhance command templates with adaptive principles and testing requirements. Add critical validation points across various commands to ensure quality and adaptability.

templates/commands/constitution.md, after:

---
description: Establish adaptive governance principles using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware institutional learning.
handoffs:
  - label: Apply Adaptive Principles
    agent: arckit.define
    prompt: Apply constitution principles to feature specification...
  - label: Update Governance Framework
    agent: arckit.plan
    prompt: Plan for governance improvements based on constitution
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/create-new-feature.sh --json "{ARGS}"
  ps: scripts/powershell/create-new-feature.ps1 -Json "{ARGS}"
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for CONSTITUTION_FILE, GOVERNANCE_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read existing `.arckit/memory/constitution.md` if available, otherwise start fresh. Load CONSTITUTION_FILE template.

3. **Execute adaptive constitution workflow**:
   - Define Core Adaptive Principles
   - Establish Adaptive Governance Framework  
   - Create Reasoning Chain Protocols
   - Design Evolution Framework Implementation
   - Implement Context Integration Standards
   - Build Learning & Improvement Systems

4. **Adaptive Governance Validation**: Validate constitution against:
   - Organizational adaptability requirements
   - Context sensitivity needs
   - Multi-agent collaboration capabilities

5. **Generate Adaptive Governance Artifacts**: Create governance artifacts with:
   - Adaptive decision-making frameworks
   - Context-aware policy mechanisms
   - Learning and evolution protocols

## Core Principles of Adaptive Reasoning Chains

### Adaptive Behavioral Principles

1. **Principles Guiding Adaptive Behavior**:
   - Core principles that govern adaptive behavior
   - Values that remain consistent during evolution
   - Ethical guidelines for adaptive systems

2. **Evolution Integrity Principles**:
   - Principles that maintain system integrity during change
   - Consistency requirements across evolution paths
   - Stability requirements during adaptation

3. **Context Awareness Principles**:
   - Principles for appropriate context-sensitive behavior
   - Guidelines for context detection and response
   - Ethical considerations for context usage

## Adaptive Governance Framework

### Dynamic Decision-Making

1. **Adaptive Decision Authority**:
   - How decisions are made in evolving systems
   - Authority structures that adapt to context
   - Conflict resolution in dynamic environments

2. **Context-Sensitive Governance**:
   - Governance mechanisms that adapt to different contexts
   - Policy frameworks that adjust to environment
   - Authority delegation based on context

3. **Multi-Agent Coordination**:
   - How multiple agents collaborate in adaptive systems
   - Shared knowledge protocols
   - Coordination mechanisms across agents

## Reasoning Chain Protocols

### Chain Creation Standards

1. **Adaptive Chain Creation**:
   - Standards for creating reasoning chains
   - Protocols for multi-agent collaboration
   - Guidelines for traceability and accountability

2. **Chain Evolution Protocols**:
   - How reasoning chains evolve over time
   - Standards for chain modification
   - Quality criteria for chain updates

3. **Cross-Chain Coordination**:
   - How different reasoning chains interact
   - Consistency mechanisms between chains
   - Conflict resolution in chain interactions

## Evolution Framework Implementation

### System Evolution Governance

1. **Evolution Management Framework**:
   - Framework for managing system evolution
   - Standards for adaptation triggers
   - Quality criteria for evolutionary changes

2. **Change Readiness Assessment**:
   - How to assess if systems are ready for change
   - Criteria for evolutionary path selection
   - Risk assessment for evolution decisions

3. **Evolution Quality Gates**:
   - Quality checkpoints during evolution
   - Validation criteria for evolutionary changes
   - Rollback triggers for failed evolutions

## Context Integration Standards

### Environmental Adaptation

1. **Context Detection Standards**:
   - Principles for context awareness
   - Guidelines for environmental adaptation
   - Standards for context-sensitive behavior

2. **Context Transition Protocols**:
   - How to handle context transitions safely
   - Consistency requirements across contexts
   - Validation during context switching

3. **Context Boundary Management**:
   - How to define and manage context boundaries
   - Cross-context coordination requirements
   - Context isolation when needed

## Learning & Improvement Systems

### Continuous Improvement Framework

1. **Institutional Learning Principles**:
   - Principles for continuous learning
   - Mechanisms for institutional knowledge
   - Standards for methodology improvement

2. **Adaptive Knowledge Management**:
   - How knowledge adapts to new information
   - Learning from success and failure
   - Knowledge sharing across contexts

3. **Improvement Validation**:
   - How to validate improvement effectiveness
   - Standards for improvement assessment
   - Feedback integration for continuous improvement

## Key rules

- Constitution must support adaptation at all levels
- Include context-aware governance mechanisms
- Build in learning and institutional memory systems
- ERROR on principles that impede adaptation or learning
- **CRITICAL**: All implementations must meet quality and verification standards
- **CRITICAL**: Testing and validation are required for all deliverables
- **CRITICAL**: Code correctness and functionality verification are mandatory
- **CRITICAL**: Dependencies must be validated before project completion

## Next Step Recommendation

Now that your project constitution is established, the most logical next step is:

- **Primary**: Run `/arckit.define` to create your first feature specification guided by the governance principles you've established
- **Alternative**: Use the constitution as reference in future commands to maintain consistency

The `/arckit.define` command will create feature specifications that align with the adaptive principles and governance framework you've defined.

**Pro tip**: All future development should refer back to these constitution principles to ensure consistency and alignment with your governance standards.
