templates/commands/design.md, before:

---
description: Execute adaptive architecture design using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware design patterns.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Adaptive Implementation Plan
    agent: arckit.plan
    prompt: Create an adaptive implementation plan based on the design...
  - label: Generate Adaptive Tasks
    agent: arckit.chain
    prompt: Generate adaptive task chains for the design
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/setup-design.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/setup-design.ps1 -Json
agent_scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh __AGENT__
  ps: scripts/powershell/update-agent-context.ps1 -AgentType __AGENT__
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for SPEC_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read SPEC_FILE, ANALYSIS_FILE, and `/memory/constitution.md`. Load DESIGN_FILE template (already copied).

3. **Execute adaptive design workflow**: Follow the structure in DESIGN_FILE template to:
   - Fill System Architecture with evolution capabilities
   - Fill Context-Aware Design Elements
   - Generate Evolution-Ready Patterns
   - Define Adaptive Infrastructure
   - Create Reasoning Chain Integration
   - Assess Quality Attributes for adaptive systems

4. **Adaptive Design Validation**: Validate design against:
   - Adaptation requirements from spec
   - Context switching capabilities
   - Evolution pathway feasibility

5. **Generate Adaptive Components**: Create design artifacts that incorporate adaptation mechanisms:
   - Adaptive interfaces
   - Context-aware modules
   - Evolution-ready patterns
   - Learning mechanisms

## Adaptive Architecture Design

### System Architecture

1. **Core Adaptive Components**:
   - Components designed with evolution in mind
   - Interfaces that can adapt to changing requirements
   - Data flow patterns supporting dynamic behavior

2. **Context-Aware Elements**:
   - How the system responds to different contexts
   - Decision points based on environmental factors
   - Context detection and handling mechanisms

3. **Evolution-Ready Patterns**:
   - Design patterns that support dynamic evolution
   - Modular components with clear boundaries
   - Interfaces designed for future extension

### Adaptive Infrastructure

1. **Infrastructure that Adapts**:
   - Scalable resources that adjust to changing needs
   - Configuration management for different contexts
   - Monitoring for adaptation effectiveness

2. **Context Management**:
   - Context detection systems
   - Context switching mechanisms
   - Context-aware routing and processing

3. **Learning Systems**:
   - Feedback collection mechanisms
   - Data storage for learning
   - Analytics for improvement identification

## Reasoning Chain Integration

### Decision Traceability

- How design decisions connect to requirements
- Links between architecture choices and specification
- Justification for adaptive design choices

### Adaptive Reasoning

- How the system makes decisions in different contexts
- Logic flows that adapt to changing conditions
- Decision trees with multiple context branches

### Knowledge Integration

- How design decisions build on previous knowledge
- Learning from similar systems or contexts
- Institutional knowledge incorporation

## Quality Attributes for Adaptive Systems

### Performance in Dynamic Environments

- Performance considerations for changing contexts
- Resource allocation during adaptation
- Latency for context switching

### Security in Adaptive Systems

- Security during adaptation processes
- Authentication/authorization for changing contexts
- Vulnerability management for evolving systems

### Reliability During Evolution

- Maintaining reliability during changes
- Fallback mechanisms for failed adaptations
- Consistency across different contexts

### Maintainability of Changing Systems

- Managing code complexity in adaptive systems
- Documentation for evolving components
- Testing strategies for changing behavior

## Key rules

- Design for adaptation from the ground up
- Ensure context awareness at all levels
- Build in learning and improvement mechanisms
- ERROR on architecture decisions that impede adaptation

Commit message:

Update project structure and documentation for adaptive development. Modify .gitignore to include new directories and files. Remove outdated spec-driven documentation. Refactor bash and PowerShell scripts to align with new directory structure. Enhance command templates with adaptive principles and testing requirements. Add critical validation points across various commands to ensure quality and adaptability.

templates/commands/design.md, after:

---
description: Execute adaptive architecture design using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware design patterns.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Adaptive Implementation Plan
    agent: arckit.plan
    prompt: Create an adaptive implementation plan based on the design...
  - label: Generate Adaptive Tasks
    agent: arckit.chain
    prompt: Generate adaptive task chains for the design
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/setup-design.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/setup-design.ps1 -Json
agent_scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh __AGENT__
  ps: scripts/powershell/update-agent-context.ps1 -AgentType __AGENT__
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for SPEC_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read SPEC_FILE, ANALYSIS_FILE, and `.arckit/memory/constitution.md`. Load DESIGN_FILE template (already copied).

3. **Execute adaptive design workflow**: Follow the structure in DESIGN_FILE template to:
   - Fill System Architecture with evolution capabilities
   - Fill Context-Aware Design Elements
   - Generate Evolution-Ready Patterns
   - Define Adaptive Infrastructure
   - **CRITICAL**: Design for testability (ensure all components can be tested)
   - **CRITICAL**: Create testable interfaces and modules
   - **CRITICAL**: Design verification and validation architecture
   - Create Reasoning Chain Integration
   - Assess Quality Attributes for adaptive systems

4. **Adaptive Design Validation**: Validate design against:
   - Adaptation requirements from spec
   - Context switching capabilities
   - Evolution pathway feasibility

5. **Generate Adaptive Components**: Create design artifacts that incorporate adaptation mechanisms:
   - Adaptive interfaces
   - Context-aware modules
   - Evolution-ready patterns
   - Learning mechanisms

## Adaptive Architecture Design

### System Architecture

1. **Core Adaptive Components**:
   - Components designed with evolution in mind
   - Interfaces that can adapt to changing requirements
   - Data flow patterns supporting dynamic behavior

2. **Context-Aware Elements**:
   - How the system responds to different contexts
   - Decision points based on environmental factors
   - Context detection and handling mechanisms

3. **Evolution-Ready Patterns**:
   - Design patterns that support dynamic evolution
   - Modular components with clear boundaries
   - Interfaces designed for future extension

### Adaptive Infrastructure

1. **Infrastructure that Adapts**:
   - Scalable resources that adjust to changing needs
   - Configuration management for different contexts
   - Monitoring for adaptation effectiveness

2. **Context Management**:
   - Context detection systems
   - Context switching mechanisms
   - Context-aware routing and processing

3. **Learning Systems**:
   - Feedback collection mechanisms
   - Data storage for learning
   - Analytics for improvement identification

## Reasoning Chain Integration

### Decision Traceability

- How design decisions connect to requirements
- Links between architecture choices and specification
- Justification for adaptive design choices

### Adaptive Reasoning

- How the system makes decisions in different contexts
- Logic flows that adapt to changing conditions
- Decision trees with multiple context branches

### Knowledge Integration

- How design decisions build on previous knowledge
- Learning from similar systems or contexts
- Institutional knowledge incorporation

## Quality Attributes for Adaptive Systems

### Performance in Dynamic Environments

- Performance considerations for changing contexts
- Resource allocation during adaptation
- Latency for context switching

### Security in Adaptive Systems

- Security during adaptation processes
- Authentication/authorization for changing contexts
- Vulnerability management for evolving systems

### Reliability During Evolution

- Maintaining reliability during changes
- Fallback mechanisms for failed adaptations
- Consistency across different contexts

### Maintainability of Changing Systems

- Managing code complexity in adaptive systems
- Documentation for evolving components
- Testing strategies for changing behavior

## Key rules

- Design for adaptation from the ground up
- Ensure context awareness at all levels
- Build in learning and improvement mechanisms
- ERROR on architecture decisions that impede adaptation

## Next Step Recommendation

Now that your adaptive design is complete, the most logical next step is:

- **Primary**: Run `/arckit.plan` to create an implementation plan based on your adaptive architecture
- **Alternative**: Run `/arckit.chain` to generate adaptive task chains directly from the design

The `/arckit.plan` command will create a detailed implementation plan that incorporates your adaptive architecture and evolution pathways.

**Pro tip**: The adaptive architecture you've designed will guide the planning process, ensuring implementation strategies align with your architectural decisions.
