templates/commands/implement.md, before:

---
description: Execute adaptive implementation using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware deployment strategies.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Adaptive Testing Plan
    agent: arckit.checklist
    prompt: Create adaptive quality assurance checklist...
  - label: Update Adaptive Architecture
    agent: arckit.design
    prompt: Update architecture based on implementation learning
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/create-new-feature.sh --json "{ARGS}"
  ps: scripts/powershell/create-new-feature.ps1 -Json "{ARGS}"
---
# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for TASKS_FILE, IMPLEMENTATION_DIR, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read TASKS_FILE, PLAN_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, SPEC_FILE, and `/memory/constitution.md`.

3. **Execute adaptive implementation workflow**:
   - Initialize Adaptive Implementation Environment
   - Execute Context-Sensitive Implementation Tasks
   - Apply Evolution Management Techniques
   - Integrate Reasoning Chain Logic
   - Perform Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems
   - Establish Monitoring & Feedback Systems

4. **Adaptive Implementation Validation**: Validate implementation against:
   - Adaptation requirements from upstream artifacts
   - Context switching capabilities
   - Evolution pathway implementations

5. **Generate Adaptive Implementation Artifacts**: Create implementation artifacts with:
   - Adaptive configuration files
   - Context-aware deployment mechanisms
   - Learning and feedback systems

## Implementation Approach

### Adaptive System Implementation

1. **Context-Sensitive Implementation**:
   - Implementation strategies that adapt to different contexts
   - Environmental configuration management
   - Dynamic behavior based on context detection

2. **Evolution-Ready Code Structure**:
   - Code organization supporting dynamic changes
   - Interfaces designed for adaptation
   - Configuration mechanisms for context sensitivity

3. **Adaptive Architecture Implementation**:
   - How to implement the adaptive architecture design
   - Context switching mechanisms
   - Dynamic component loading and configuration

## Reasoning Chain Integration

### Implementation Decision Integration

1. **Decision Traceability Implementation**:
   - How implementation decisions connect to reasoning chains
   - Traceability systems between code and specifications
   - Documentation of implementation rationale in code

2. **Adaptive Logic Implementation**:
   - How reasoning chains are implemented in code
   - Decision trees with multiple context branches
   - Logic flows that adapt to changing conditions

3. **Knowledge Integration Systems**:
   - How implementation builds on institutional knowledge
   - Learning from similar implementations
   - Knowledge sharing between implementations

## Evolution Management

### Code Evolution Implementation

1. **Adaptive Versioning**:
   - How to manage code evolution over time
   - Versioning strategies for adaptive systems
   - Deployment considerations for changing systems

2. **Dynamic Configuration**:
   - Configuration systems that adapt to context
   - Runtime configuration updates
   - Context-based feature toggles

3. **Evolution Safety Mechanisms**:
   - Safeguards during system evolution
   - Rollback mechanisms for failed adaptations
   - Consistency during evolution transitions

## Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems

### Testing Adaptive Systems

1. **Context-Aware Testing**:
   - Testing strategies for evolving codebases
   - Context-specific test cases
   - Validation of adaptation mechanisms

2. **Adaptive Test Generation**:
   - Tests that evolve with the system
   - Dynamic test case generation
   - Context-sensitive test execution

3. **Evolution Validation**:
   - Validation of adaptation effectiveness
   - Quality gates that adjust to new requirements
   - Continuous validation during evolution

## Monitoring & Feedback

### Runtime Adaptation Monitoring

1. **Adaptive System Monitoring**:
   - Runtime monitoring of adaptation behavior
   - Context switching tracking
   - Performance monitoring during evolution

2. **Feedback Collection Systems**:
   - How to collect feedback for improvement
   - User behavior monitoring for adaptation
   - System performance feedback for learning

3. **Adaptive Performance Tracking**:
   - Performance metrics that evolve with requirements
   - Context-aware performance thresholds
   - Learning from performance data

## Key rules

- Implementation must support adaptation from the ground up
- Include context detection and switching mechanisms
- Build in learning and improvement systems
- ERROR on implementations that don't accommodate evolution

Commit message:

Update project structure and documentation for adaptive development. Modify .gitignore to include new directories and files. Remove outdated spec-driven documentation. Refactor bash and PowerShell scripts to align with new directory structure. Enhance command templates with adaptive principles and testing requirements. Add critical validation points across various commands to ensure quality and adaptability.

templates/commands/implement.md, after:

---
description: Execute adaptive implementation using dynamic reasoning chains and context-aware deployment strategies.
handoffs:
  - label: Create Adaptive Testing Plan
    agent: arckit.checklist
    prompt: Create adaptive quality assurance checklist...
  - label: Update Adaptive Architecture
    agent: arckit.design
    prompt: Update architecture based on implementation learning
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/create-new-feature.sh --json "{ARGS}"
  ps: scripts/powershell/create-new-feature.ps1 -Json "{ARGS}"
---
# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for TASKS_FILE, IMPLEMENTATION_DIR, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read TASKS_FILE, PLAN_FILE, DESIGN_FILE, SPEC_FILE, and `.arckit/memory/constitution.md`.

3. **Execute adaptive implementation workflow**:
   - Initialize Adaptive Implementation Environment
   - Execute Context-Sensitive Implementation Tasks
   - Apply Evolution Management Techniques
   - Integrate Reasoning Chain Logic
   - **CRITICAL**: Implement comprehensive testing strategy (unit, integration, system tests)
   - **CRITICAL**: Verify all functionality works as specified before completion
   - **CRITICAL**: Validate dependencies and third-party integrations
   - Perform Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems
   - Establish Monitoring & Feedback Systems

4. **Adaptive Implementation Validation**: Validate implementation against:
   - Adaptation requirements from upstream artifacts
   - Context switching capabilities
   - Evolution pathway implementations
   - **CRITICAL**: Functional correctness - all implemented features must work as specified
   - **CRITICAL**: Code quality standards - all code must be clean, documented, and maintainable
   - **CRITICAL**: Test coverage - all critical paths must have automated tests with >=80% coverage
   - **CRITICAL**: Dependency validation - all dependencies must be verified and working
   - **CRITICAL**: Performance requirements - must meet specified performance criteria
   - **CRITICAL**: Error handling - must gracefully handle edge cases and error conditions

5. **Generate Adaptive Implementation Artifacts**: Create implementation artifacts with:
   - Adaptive configuration files
   - Context-aware deployment mechanisms
   - Learning and feedback systems

## Implementation Approach

### Adaptive System Implementation

1. **Context-Sensitive Implementation**:
   - Implementation strategies that adapt to different contexts
   - Environmental configuration management
   - Dynamic behavior based on context detection

2. **Evolution-Ready Code Structure**:
   - Code organization supporting dynamic changes
   - Interfaces designed for adaptation
   - Configuration mechanisms for context sensitivity

3. **Adaptive Architecture Implementation**:
   - How to implement the adaptive architecture design
   - Context switching mechanisms
   - Dynamic component loading and configuration

## Reasoning Chain Integration

### Implementation Decision Integration

1. **Decision Traceability Implementation**:
   - How implementation decisions connect to reasoning chains
   - Traceability systems between code and specifications
   - Documentation of implementation rationale in code

2. **Adaptive Logic Implementation**:
   - How reasoning chains are implemented in code
   - Decision trees with multiple context branches
   - Logic flows that adapt to changing conditions

3. **Knowledge Integration Systems**:
   - How implementation builds on institutional knowledge
   - Learning from similar implementations
   - Knowledge sharing between implementations

## Evolution Management

### Code Evolution Implementation

1. **Adaptive Versioning**:
   - How to manage code evolution over time
   - Versioning strategies for adaptive systems
   - Deployment considerations for changing systems

2. **Dynamic Configuration**:
   - Configuration systems that adapt to context
   - Runtime configuration updates
   - Context-based feature toggles

3. **Evolution Safety Mechanisms**:
   - Safeguards during system evolution
   - Rollback mechanisms for failed adaptations
   - Consistency during evolution transitions

## Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems

### Testing Adaptive Systems

1. **Context-Aware Testing**:
   - Testing strategies for evolving codebases
   - Context-specific test cases
   - Validation of adaptation mechanisms

2. **Adaptive Test Generation**:
   - Tests that evolve with the system
   - Dynamic test case generation
   - Context-sensitive test execution

3. **Evolution Validation**:
   - Validation of adaptation effectiveness
   - Quality gates that adjust to new requirements
   - Continuous validation during evolution

## Monitoring & Feedback

### Runtime Adaptation Monitoring

1. **Adaptive System Monitoring**:
   - Runtime monitoring of adaptation behavior
   - Context switching tracking
   - Performance monitoring during evolution

2. **Feedback Collection Systems**:
   - How to collect feedback for improvement
   - User behavior monitoring for adaptation
   - System performance feedback for learning

3. **Adaptive Performance Tracking**:
   - Performance metrics that evolve with requirements
   - Context-aware performance thresholds
   - Learning from performance data

## Key rules

- Implementation must support adaptation from the ground up
- Include context detection and switching mechanisms
- Build in learning and improvement systems
- ERROR on implementations that don't accommodate evolution
- All code must be functionally correct, tested, and verifiable before completion
- Implementation must include automated tests that verify functionality
- All dependencies and requirements must be validated as working
- Implementation must be verifiable through automated or manual testing procedures

## Next Step Recommendation

Now that your adaptive implementation is complete, the most logical next step is:

- **Primary**: Run `/arckit.checklist` to create an adaptive quality assurance checklist for your implementation
- **Alternative**: Return to `/arckit.define` for the next feature, incorporating lessons learned

The `/arckit.checklist` command will create quality assurance measures to validate your implementation against the original requirements and adaptation goals.

**Pro tip**: Use the monitoring and feedback systems you built into your implementation to inform future development cycles and improvement efforts.
