templates/commands/plan.md, before:

---
description: Execute adaptive implementation planning using dynamic reasoning chains and evolution-ready strategies.
handoffs:
  - label: Generate Adaptive Tasks
    agent: arckit.chain
    prompt: Generate adaptive task chains based on the plan...
  - label: Create Adaptive Checklist
    agent: arckit.checklist
    prompt: Create an adaptive checklist for the implementation plan
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/setup-plan.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/setup-plan.ps1 -Json
agent_scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh __AGENT__
  ps: scripts/powershell/update-agent-context.ps1 -AgentType __AGENT__
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for DESIGN_FILE, PLAN_FILE, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read DESIGN_FILE, SPEC_FILE, and `/memory/constitution.md`. Load PLAN_FILE template (already copied).

3. **Execute adaptive planning workflow**: Follow the structure in PLAN_FILE template to:
   - Define Evolution Strategy (how implementation adapts to change)
   - Create Adaptive Task Breakdown (dynamic tasks that evolve)
   - Design Context-Sensitive Execution (behavior changes with environment)
   - Plan Risk Mitigation with Adaptation (evolving risk management)
   - Establish Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems (validation during change)
   - Design Learning & Improvement mechanisms

4. **Adaptive Planning Validation**: Validate plan against:
   - Adaptation requirements from spec and design
   - Context switching readiness
   - Evolution pathway feasibility

5. **Generate Adaptive Planning Artifacts**: Create planning documents that incorporate:
   - Dynamic milestones
   - Context-aware deliverables
   - Learning mechanisms

## Evolution Strategy

### Dynamic Implementation Approach

1. **Adaptation Mechanisms**:
   - How implementation will adapt to changing requirements
   - Phases designed for iterative improvement
   - Feedback integration points

2. **Context Sensitivity**:
   - How implementation approach changes with environment
   - Conditional strategies for different scenarios
   - Resource allocation that adapts to needs

3. **Evolution Pathways**:
   - Multiple implementation paths for different contexts
   - Fork and merge strategies for divergent evolution
   - Rollback mechanisms for failed adaptations

## Adaptive Task Breakdown

### Dynamic Task Management

1. **Context-Adaptive Tasks**:
   - Tasks with dynamic priority based on context
   - Dependencies that may change during implementation
   - Milestones that adjust to evolving specifications

2. **Evolution-Ready Dependencies**:
   - Dependencies designed to accommodate change
   - Alternative dependency paths for different contexts
   - Dependency management during evolution

3. **Feedback-Driven Task Evolution**:
   - How tasks evolve based on intermediate results
   - Dynamic task creation during execution
   - Conditional task dependencies

## Risk Mitigation with Adaptation

### Adaptive Risk Management

1. **Evolution Risks**:
   - Risks to adaptation process itself
   - Mitigation strategies that evolve with new information
   - Contingency plans for failed adaptations

2. **Context Transition Risks**:
   - Risks during context switching
   - Mitigation for rapid or unexpected context changes
   - Fallback strategies for context transition failures

3. **Learning System Risks**:
   - Risks from incorrect learning or adaptation
   - Validation mechanisms for learning outcomes
   - Human oversight requirements for critical adaptations

## Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems

### Adaptive Validation Strategies

1. **Dynamic Testing**:
   - Testing strategies that account for change
   - Validation methods for evolving components
   - Quality gates that adjust to new requirements

2. **Context-Sensitive Validation**:
   - Different validation criteria for different contexts
   - Validation during context transitions
   - Consistency checks across contexts

3. **Evolution Monitoring**:
   - Tracking adaptation effectiveness
   - Quality metrics that evolve with requirements
   - Alerting for adaptation failures

## Learning & Improvement Mechanisms

### Continuous Improvement

1. **Implementation Learning**:
   - How implementation process learns from experience
   - Feedback loops between implementation and design
   - Continuous improvement mechanisms

2. **Knowledge Accumulation**:
   - How lessons learned are captured and reused
   - Institutional knowledge about adaptation
   - Best practices for adaptive implementation

3. **Adaptive Process Improvement**:
   - How the planning process itself improves
   - Evolution of planning methodologies
   - Learning from plan execution outcomes

## Key rules

- Plan for adaptation throughout the implementation
- Include context-aware execution strategies
- Build in learning and feedback mechanisms
- ERROR on plans that don't accommodate evolution

Commit message:

Update project structure and documentation for adaptive development. Modify .gitignore to include new directories and files. Remove outdated spec-driven documentation. Refactor bash and PowerShell scripts to align with new directory structure. Enhance command templates with adaptive principles and testing requirements. Add critical validation points across various commands to ensure quality and adaptability.

templates/commands/plan.md, after:

---
description: Execute adaptive implementation planning using dynamic reasoning chains and evolution-ready strategies.
handoffs:
  - label: Generate Adaptive Tasks
    agent: arckit.chain
    prompt: Generate adaptive task chains based on the plan...
  - label: Create Adaptive Checklist
    agent: arckit.checklist
    prompt: Create an adaptive checklist for the implementation plan
    send: true
scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/setup-plan.sh --json
  ps: scripts/powershell/setup-plan.ps1 -Json
agent_scripts:
  sh: scripts/bash/update-agent-context.sh __AGENT__
  ps: scripts/powershell/update-agent-context.ps1 -AgentType __AGENT__
---

# User Input

```text
$ARGUMENTS
```

You **MUST** consider the user input before proceeding (if not empty).

## Outline

1. **Setup**: Run `{SCRIPT}` from repo root and parse JSON for DESIGN_FILE, PLAN_FILE, SPECS_DIR, BRANCH. For single quotes in args like "I'm Groot", use escape syntax: e.g 'I'\''m Groot' (or double-quote if possible: "I'm Groot").

2. **Load context**: Read DESIGN_FILE, SPEC_FILE, and `.arckit/memory/constitution.md`. Load PLAN_FILE template (already copied).

3. **Execute adaptive planning workflow**: Follow the structure in PLAN_FILE template to:
   - Define Evolution Strategy (how implementation adapts to change)
   - Create Adaptive Task Breakdown (dynamic tasks that evolve)
   - Design Context-Sensitive Execution (behavior changes with environment)
   - Plan Risk Mitigation with Adaptation (evolving risk management)
   - **CRITICAL**: Establish comprehensive testing strategy (unit, integration, system tests)
   - **CRITICAL**: Plan functionality verification procedures for all features
   - **CRITICAL**: Design dependency validation and integration testing approach
   - **CRITICAL**: Plan error handling and edge case verification procedures
   - Establish Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems (validation during change)
   - Design Learning & Improvement mechanisms

4. **Adaptive Planning Validation**: Validate plan against:
   - Adaptation requirements from spec and design
   - Context switching readiness
   - Evolution pathway feasibility

5. **Generate Adaptive Planning Artifacts**: Create planning documents that incorporate:
   - Dynamic milestones
   - Context-aware deliverables
   - Learning mechanisms

## Evolution Strategy

### Dynamic Implementation Approach

1. **Adaptation Mechanisms**:
   - How implementation will adapt to changing requirements
   - Phases designed for iterative improvement
   - Feedback integration points

2. **Context Sensitivity**:
   - How implementation approach changes with environment
   - Conditional strategies for different scenarios
   - Resource allocation that adapts to needs

3. **Evolution Pathways**:
   - Multiple implementation paths for different contexts
   - Fork and merge strategies for divergent evolution
   - Rollback mechanisms for failed adaptations

## Adaptive Task Breakdown

### Dynamic Task Management

1. **Context-Adaptive Tasks**:
   - Tasks with dynamic priority based on context
   - Dependencies that may change during implementation
   - Milestones that adjust to evolving specifications

2. **Evolution-Ready Dependencies**:
   - Dependencies designed to accommodate change
   - Alternative dependency paths for different contexts
   - Dependency management during evolution

3. **Feedback-Driven Task Evolution**:
   - How tasks evolve based on intermediate results
   - Dynamic task creation during execution
   - Conditional task dependencies

## Risk Mitigation with Adaptation

### Adaptive Risk Management

1. **Evolution Risks**:
   - Risks to adaptation process itself
   - Mitigation strategies that evolve with new information
   - Contingency plans for failed adaptations

2. **Context Transition Risks**:
   - Risks during context switching
   - Mitigation for rapid or unexpected context changes
   - Fallback strategies for context transition failures

3. **Learning System Risks**:
   - Risks from incorrect learning or adaptation
   - Validation mechanisms for learning outcomes
   - Human oversight requirements for critical adaptations

## Quality Assurance for Adaptive Systems

### Adaptive Validation Strategies

1. **Dynamic Testing**:
   - Testing strategies that account for change
   - Validation methods for evolving components
   - Quality gates that adjust to new requirements

2. **Context-Sensitive Validation**:
   - Different validation criteria for different contexts
   - Validation during context transitions
   - Consistency checks across contexts

3. **Evolution Monitoring**:
   - Tracking adaptation effectiveness
   - Quality metrics that evolve with requirements
   - Alerting for adaptation failures

## Learning & Improvement Mechanisms

### Continuous Improvement

1. **Implementation Learning**:
   - How implementation process learns from experience
   - Feedback loops between implementation and design
   - Continuous improvement mechanisms

2. **Knowledge Accumulation**:
   - How lessons learned are captured and reused
   - Institutional knowledge about adaptation
   - Best practices for adaptive implementation

3. **Adaptive Process Improvement**:
   - How the planning process itself improves
   - Evolution of planning methodologies
   - Learning from plan execution outcomes

## Key rules

- Plan for adaptation throughout the implementation
- Include context-aware execution strategies
- Build in learning and feedback mechanisms
- ERROR on plans that don't accommodate evolution

## Next Step Recommendation

Now that your adaptive plan is complete, the most logical next step is:

- **Primary**: Run `/arckit.chain` to generate adaptive task chains based on your implementation plan
- **Alternative**: Run `/arckit.checklist` to create an adaptive quality checklist for your plan

The `/arckit.chain` command will break down your plan into actionable, adaptive task chains that can evolve as implementation progresses.

**Pro tip**: Use the evolution strategies and learning mechanisms you defined in your plan as guidance during task chain execution.
